As much as possible, the terms in this document are defined from simple to complex. Terms defined later in the document often build upon ones from earlier in the document. The first use of a term is bolded, while further uses of it are in normal text. Alphabetical index of all terms can be found at the end of the document.


Equipment        2

Bags        2

Shoes        2

Shoe mods        2

Tricks        2

Setting the Bag        2

Components        3

Contacts        3

Defining a contact        3

Contact Surfaces        3

Contact Types        3

Toe & Clipper        3

Other Contacts        3

Dexes        3

Dex Directions        4

Dex Styles & Fullness        4

Body        4

Ducks        4

Spins        4

In the air        4

Trick phases        5

Sides        5

Paradox        5

Stance        5

Execution        6

Trick names        6

Shorthand modifiers        6

Symposium modifiers        7

Combining multiple tricks        7

Ending a trick or string        8

ADDs        9

ADD Categories        9

ADD Groupings        9

ADD System Controversy        9

Circles        9

Events & Competition        10

Competitive Disciplines        10

For-Fun Games        10

Non-Freestyle Footbag Disciplines/Games        11

Index        11


Equipment
Bags
Footbags, or bags for short, are the primary piece of equipment used to play freestyle footbag. Within footbag culture, you’ll mostly hear people refer to them as footbags or bags, but you’ll sometimes hear them referred to as hacks or even hacky sacks (somewhat ironically).


Bags are constructed with different numbers of panels and these numbers are used to refer to the style of bag, most commonly 32s and 14s, but can be any number. Bags can be filled with various kinds of fill, such as plastic or sand, but most often metal, which gives them enough weight to properly control and feel.


Brand new bags tend to have stiff material that needs to be broken-in. A not broken-in bag will often be rolly and harder to control, while a well broken-in bag will be more floppy or stally.

Shoes
Though footbag can be played barefoot or with any kind of shoe, there are certain kinds that are most-suited to the sport. Among the many brands and models used over the years, the two that have most become part of the culture are the Adidas Rod Laver and Quantums. For a long time, from the mid-90s to mid-2010s, Lavers were the standard freestyle shoe, but the specific model that was popular is no longer made. Quantums were the first shoes designed specifically for footbag by the community itself which had a run in the 2010s and have recently been redesigned and released.

Shoe mods
The most important aspect of footbag shoes are the surfaces, specifically the toe and inside surfaces, which are the most common ones used in freestyle.


Most shoes that are used for footbag need some modifications or mods in order to reach their full potential. The most common one is a toe wall mod, which pulls the toe walls away from the toe surface and creates a toe box that is large and sturdy enough to hold a bag.


Most other mods don’t have a special name and generally have descriptive names, except for the Brocka (“Brochka” or “Brokka”, depending on where you live) mod. This mod was named after former player Peter Brocka (who is now the mayor of Trnava, Slovakia). A Brocka mod is the removal of material from the inner ankle area, which helps to create a flatter inside surface.


Tricks
Footbag tricks are performed using a footbag and various parts of the body, most prominently the legs. To practice a trick without the bag, to get a feel for the motions, is to air shred it.

Setting the Bag
The vast majority of footbag tricks happen while the bag is in the air. The act of getting the bag in the air is called the set or setting the bag.


Most often the bag is set with one leg/foot, while the other remains on the ground. The one setting the bag is the set leg/foot while the other is the support leg/foot.


To get more energy and rhythm into stalls and sets, the magic hop is used, where the support leg does a small hop just before and just after the bag is stalled on the set foot. The magic hop helps to use less energy and smoothen stalls and sets. It doesn’t seem to be universally agreed upon if the magic hop refers to the hop during “catch” or “set”, or rather a combination of the two.

Components
Traditional footbag tricks are very modular and are created from combining and ordering different components. Components are “trick building blocks” which can be slotted in and out at various points of a trick.

Contacts
The simplest type of component is a contact, where a part of the body comes into contact with the bag, which typically marks the end of a trick.

Defining a contact
A specific contact is defined by a surface of the body combined with a type of motion applied to the bag.

Contact Surfaces
The most common contact surfaces are the toe and inside surfaces of the shoe, as well as the less commonly used outside, heel, and sole surfaces. Any non-shoe surface just uses the name for the part of the body, such as knee, calf, or back.

Contact Types
The simplest type of contact is a kick. Toe kicks done with an ankle hinge are sometimes called toe flicks, and knee kicks are sometimes called knee bumps.


The most common contact type seen in freestyle is a delay or stall, where the bag is briefly stopped on a surface before being set for the next trick.

Toe & Clipper
The most common contacts seen in typical freestyle are Toe Stall and Clipper Stall, or simply Toe and Clipper (with an implied “stall”)


A Clipper is an Inside Stall in a crossbody (xbd) position, meaning that one leg is positioned behind the other. In order to get the flattest possible surface for an Inside Stall or Clipper, you have to bend or crank your ankle in order to flex the inside surface upwards.


Tricks that primarily use either toe or clipper are called toe tricks or clipper tricks and players that favor one kind over the other can be described as toe players or clipper players.

Other Contacts
Other less common types of contacts are: rolls, where the bag literally rolls from one position to another; pincher, where the bag is grabbed with the back of the knee; burger or stallburger where the bag is trapped between two surfaces (usually with the bag in a Toe Stall and using the other shoe on top); transfer, where the bag is moved from one contact to another; wrap where an Inside Stall is moved into a Clipper (or vice versa); walkover where the stalling foot is placed on the ground and the other steps over it; and rake where the bag is grabbed from one position and dragged to another, most commonly from Xbd to Toe. The bag can also be caught in or set from a rooted position, meaning that the foot the bag is on is on the ground.


Other named contacts that may be encountered are Cloud, which are calf contacts where the knee is bent inward and the calf is horizontal, Dragon (Xbd Outside) and Flapper (Xbd Sole).

Dexes
The primary trick component in footbag is a dexterity, or dex for short, where the leg circles the bag while it’s in the air. Dexes are so core to footbag that tricks and components without dexes are called “dexless.”

Dex Directions
Dexes can be performed in two directions that are relative to the center of the body: in-out, or in for short, which move away from the body (from “in” the body to “out” of the body), and out-in or out for short, which move towards the body.

Dex Styles & Fullness
Dexes can be done in two movement styles: hippy, where the dex motion comes from the hip and the thigh circles the bag, or leggy, where the dex motion comes from the knee and the calf circles the bag. Every dex can also be described in terms of “fullness”: A full dex is one that circles that bag entirely (leg starts on the left, circles the bag, and ends on the left). A half dex only circles the bag partially (leg starts on the left, circles the bag, and ends on the right).

Body
Lastly, body components are a catchall for non-dex movements like spinning, twisting, or jumping.

Ducks
Ducks are performed by dipping the head in a particular direction and allowing the bag to pass around the neck. Ducking, diving, weaving, and zulu are all variations of the general ducking component that differ in the direction the head moves and where the bag goes after the duck:

Ducking: head moves towards the bag, bag falls to the opposite side the head moved
Weaving: head moves towards the bag, bag falls to the same side the head moved
Diving: head moves over the bag and under it back to the original position, bag falls to the same side as the initial head movement
Zulu: head moves over the bag and under it back to the original position, bag falls to the opposite side as the initial head movement
Spins
Spins are performed by rotating the entire body to various degrees: gyro means to spin 180 degrees, while spinning means to spin 360 degrees. The two terms can be combined, along with double or triple, to create a spin of any half or full degree. Ex: Spinning Gyro = 450 degrees, Gyro Gyro = 180 degrees, then 180 degrees in the other direction.


Spins are most commonly performed as backspins where the body turns away from the bag and the back passes the bag first. An inspin turns towards the bag and the chest passes the bag first. Unless the prefix in- is used, a spin is presumed to be a backspin. In can be applied to Spinning, Gyro, or even full trick names to change the direction of the spin (like In-Vortex to mean In-gyro Drifter).

In the air
Within body components are several that are performed with the entire body in the air.


Contacts, or tricks that end with a contact, performed in the air are referred to as flying or flyers, such as a Flying Clipper Kick or Flying Toe Stall.


A symposium component is one where an active leg performs an action in a single-leg jump: the symposium leg jumps and lands on its own while the other leg remains in the air. Symposium is most often used with dexes, but can be combined with other components as long as it follows the same principle.


A symple component is one that starts symposium but midway through, the non-symple foot returns to the ground. Like symposium, symple is normally applied to dexes, but can be used for any component that fits the description. A trick that is more naturally done symple can technically be done symposium, but the bag would have to be caught in a rooted position (ex: Legover, Swirl).


The shorthand symp can be used to mean either symposium or symple, whichever the particular component would be more naturally done as (ex: Symp Mirage = Symposium Mirage, Symp Legover = Symple Legover).


A muted component is one where an active leg is held in the air for the entirety of a component without putting it on the ground. Like symposium and symple, it’s mostly used for dexes, but can be applied to other components as well. Some combinations of components more naturally lead to something muted (like Clipper>Swirl), while for others doing something muted is a variation (like Pixie ss Mirage).


Stomping is an oldschool component that refers to setting the bag, slamming both feet on the ground at the same time, and performing the trick in one big jump.

Trick phases
A single trick can be broken down into three phases depending on which direction the bag is moving at a given time. The uptime of a trick is in the time when the bag is moving up, the downtime is when the bag is moving down, and the midtime is the brief moment in between uptime and midtime when the bag is peaking.


Trick components can be paired with a phase of the trick to more precisely describe when they occur, for example, an “uptime dex,” or a “downtime spin.” Uptime components (usually ones that use dexes) are referred to as uptime sets, or just simply sets. The context should make it clear if someone is talking about a generic set of the bag or an uptime component set.


When analyzing the execution of a trick, the attack is how quickly the player begins the component of the next phase. Ex: When first learning Blur, players often need to attack the Mirage more quickly after the Stepping set.

Sides
A component can be further specified with a side to describe exactly which half of the body should perform it. Sides are described relatively to the previous component, and it’s rarely important whether it’s “left” or “right” side, but rather same-side (ss)/near or opposite (op)/far. When thinking about the body as two vertical halves, ss connects two components performed on the same vertical half, while op connects two components performed on one vertical half and then the other.


For example, a right toe set into a right leg Mirage is a Toe ss Mirage. A right toe set into a left leg Mirage is a Toe op Mirage. Be careful not to confuse sides of the body with specific legs: a ss or op component is not necessarily performed with the same or opposite leg.


Same-side/near and opposite/far mean the same thing and can be used interchangeably. When a side term is not specified for a Toe trick, it’s usually assumed to be op (ex: Toe Mirage = Toe op Mirage), and for a Clipper trick, it’s usually assumed to be ss (ex: Clipper Whirl = Clipper ss Whirl). There are probably exceptions to this, but if you want to be precise, it’s never incorrect to specify a side.

Paradox
Paradox (pdx) is a special type of far dex where: 1) the previous component was Xbd (usually a Clipper set), and 2) the dex requires a hip pivot in order to bring the leg under the bag in preparation (ex: a Pdx Mirage requires the set leg to be brought underneath the bag before the Mirage is performed). Some paradox components don’t quite fit that description (ex: Pdx Illusion), but the majority of them are “Clipper set far in-out dex.”


Paradox is technically only needed when describing ADDs (see below), but has been ingrained into many trick names (for example, Clipper Far Whirl is a valid way to describe that trick, but it’s more commonly named Pdx. Whirl).

Stance
Since the majority of tricks can be done identically using either side of the body, there are a couple of terms to denote a player’s side preferences. A player’s preferred side for a trick or a trick component is their strong side, and their non-preferred one is their flip side.


Because toe and clipper are the most common contacts, there are two terms to describe a player’s preference for the sides of those. A left/right bigfoot player is one whose strong toe and clipper use the same foot. A left/right sideways player is one whose strong toe and clipper use the same side.

Execution
Footbag tricks and trick components can be described in several ways based on their execution quality, and how well or poorly they are performed.


A clean trick or trick component is one performed well and without flaws.


A clean dex is one performed within the dex window, which is the phantom space in the air that the leg draws around the bag. A deep dex is one performed high in the window, further away from the shoe. A thin dex is one performed close to the edge of the window, closer to the shoe, and a very thin dex performed with just a bit of the shoe is sometimes called shoey.


A well-executed duck is one performed close to the neck, and a duck becomes thinner the farther from the neck it gets. A duck done with just the very top of the head is said to be crowny.


A the (“thuh”, not “thee”) component is one that is attempted but completely missed, for example, a dex that misses the window entirely, or a duck done completely above the head.


A pulled or slurry set is one where the bag is dragged through an uptime dex or a spin before the intended component actually happens (ex: a Stepping set where the leg passes over the bag while the bag remains on the set foot). Pulled spins are also sometimes referred to as froggy.


A trick that ends on a toe stall that is caught with a very arced or circular motion instead of a straight up and down motion is referred to as scooped or scoopy.

Trick names
Due to the modularity of footbag tricks, there are often several ways to name them, and usually trick names within trick names.


The technical name of a trick is one that uses the simplest named version of every component and relative side to connect them as necessary. Oftentimes, the side is implied by the previous component and is not needed. For example, the technical name of the trick “Phoenix” is Pixie Ducking Butterfly, with “Ducking op Butterfly” being implied.


The technical name of a trick is related to its Job’s Notation (technically pronounced “Jobe”, but just as often pronounced “Jahb”), named after Ben Jobe, which is a written form of all of a trick’s components, in which phase they occur, and the sides they are performed on. Ex: Clipper>ss In Dex>>op Out Dex>ss Clipper


Technical names can get quite long, so many common tricks have nicknames, usually created by the inventor of the trick. For example, “Stepping op Butterfly” has the nickname of “Ripwalk.” Not every trick has a nickname, but even if they do, it’s always valid to use the technical name to describe it.

Shorthand modifiers
Again, due to the modular-nature of tricks, there are many tricks that are very similar to each other, where they can be described as “Trick B = Trick A with slight modification.” Depending on the modification, there are many shorthand terms that can be used to quickly refer to “Trick B” as a modification of “Trick A”


PS + [base trick] means a paradox symposium version of the base trick. Ex: PS Whirl = Paradox Symposium Whirl..


Alpine + [base trick] means to divide the trick between its uptime and downtime components (as long as it has both) and insert a duck or dive in between. Taking Ripwalk as the base trick (Stepping op Butterfly), Alpine Ripwalk is a Stepping Ducking Butterfly. Alpine can be applied to a nickname or technical name, so you could say Alpine Ripwalk or Alpine Stepping op Butterfly to mean the same thing.


Whether or not the Alpine component is a Duck or a Dive depends on if the downtime component is ss or op relative to the set. If the downtime is op, then the Alpine component is a Duck (ex: Alpine Pixie op Mirage = Duck), and if it’s ss, then a Dive (ex: Alpine Stepping ss Butterfly = Dive), and you can see that these fit naturally with each. The shorthand only applies to Ducking and Diving, so if Zulu or Weaving are used, a different name will have to be used. If an alpine trick itself has a nickname (like Ripped Warrior, which is Alpine Ripwalk), you can probably get away with something like “Zulu Ripped Warrior” to mean “Ripped Warrior, but with a Zulu instead of a Duck.”


Crispy + [base trick] means to take part of the downtime phase of the base trick and “re-time” it into the uptime. For example, a DLO is a downtime Miraging Legover. A “crispy DLO” takes the mirage and moves it from downtime to uptime (making a Blurry Legover), which results in a trick that uses the same motions, but different timing. Crispy is not commonly used, and is (IMO) sometimes longer or more confusing than using the technical name.

Symposium modifiers
There is a whole group of terms to modify a base trick and turn a particular part into symposium. For the below, we’ll use Atomsmasher as the base trick, which is an Atomic Mirage.


Frontside (FS) + [base trick] means to change the uptime component of the base trick to symposium. Ex: FS Atomsmasher = Symp. Atomic Mirage.


Backside (BS) + [base trick] means to change the downtime component to symposium. Ex: BS Atomsmasher = Atomic Symp Mirage.


Full Symp + [base trick] means to change both the uptime and downtime components to symposium. Ex: Full Symp Atomsmasher = Symp Atomic Symp Mirage.


FS and BS sometimes get mistakenly applied to individual dexes or only part of a trick, rather than to a whole trick and an entire phase of that trick. To say something like “FS Eggbeater” is meaningless: because there is no “frontside” of the trick (Eggbeater is down downtime), and only one way to naturally do a Symp. Eggbeater (without catching the bag rooted).


There are alternate terms to refer to individual symposium dexes within a trick: alpha, beta, and gamma. For example: Beta Atomsmasher to mean Atomic Symp Mirage. (IMO) these terms are unnecessary and overly complicated; the above terms should make it obvious in the majority of cases which aspect of a trick is symposium.

Combining multiple tricks
All of the terms previously defined in this section apply to single tricks, but the most common way to play footbag is to combine multiple tricks in various ways.


The typical way that the sport is played is with strings or runs, which are continuous flows of tricks performed in an unplanned “stream of consciousness” style. Tricks performed one after another are said to be linked together. String length is counted in “contacts,” which in this context is used generically to encompass tricks, stalls, kicks, etc. Ex: a 12-contact string.


Any number of tricks can be written out using string notation, which uses the name of each trick separated by an arrow. Ex: Mirage>Clipper>ss Legover. The arrow denotes that the tricks are linked together with nothing in between, such as a gap, stopping, or a different trick.

A combo is any number of tricks linked in a group, usually with some sort of theme or aspect that joins them together. A string could technically be described as a combo, but combos are usually shorter and more purposefully thought-out than strings. A link is specifically a two-trick combo.


Within a string or combo, the tricks can be classified as either unique or non-unique, signifying if they’ve been done before on that specific side of the body. For example, Mirage>Legover>Mirage>ss Legover has three unique contacts: two for the Mirages on each side, and one for the Legover on one side. Even though the second Legover is a ss variant, it’s not counted as unique from the previous one because it is fundamentally the same trick.


A drill is a combo that is done using one side of the body, which then repeats exactly but with the other side of the body. A drill can be notated in string notation with just the unique half and then “rpt” at the repeat point. Ex: Mirage>Legover rpt = Mirage>Legover>Mirage>Legover. To notate more or less contacts of a drill either “[N] contacts of [drill]” or “[drill] x[N]” can be used. Ex: 3 contacts of Mirage>Legover rpt = Mirage>Legover>Mirage; Mirage>Legover rpt x3 = 12 total contacts.


A marathon drill is a drill that is repeated for a large number of contacts or until a period of time has passed (ex: 100 contacts of Mirage>ss Mirage rpt; 60 seconds of Mirage>ss Mirage rpt). When marathon drilling, drops do not interrupt the contact count (ex: drop on contact 24, next attempt is contact 25). Marathon drilling is often used to train consistency of specific tricks and general endurance.


A rewind combo is similar to a drill, but at the halfway point, the combo order reverses instead of taking the same order. For example, Legover>ss Mirage>ss Mirage>Legover.


A mirror is a link where the two tricks are mirror images of each other when comparing them in forward and reverse motion. For example, Smear>Atomic Legover is a mirror link because if the combo were reversed after the second trick, it would play back as Smear>Atomic Legover (like a palindrome).


Linking the same trick together two or more times can be described as back-to-back (b2b). Ex: PLO b2b = PLO>PLO.


A multiplier can be applied to a trick or combo to specify a longer amount of total contacts with x[N]. Ex: Mirage x5 = 5 mirages, Mirage>Legover x3 = 6 total contacts.


Both sides or bs refers to doing a trick using both sides of the body. A combo/string/player/etc that predominantly uses both sides can be called both sided, while one predominantly using one side can be called one sided.


A trick that’s done on both sides within a single string is called BSOS, which stands for “both sides one string” and is sometimes jokingly written as “bee sauce.” BSOR is sometimes used in place of BSOS, meaning “both sides one run.”


Doing a trick, or being able to do a trick in the middle of a string is called midstring, which is typically much harder than doing the trick in isolation.


A shuffle combo or shuffling is made out of linking tricks together that use uptime dexing sets.


LIMP tricks are the collection of basic toe tricks: Legover, Illusion, Mirage, and Pickup. CLIMP is an extension of LIMP which includes Clipper. An Everything drill is a drill which uses a single uptime set + each LIMP trick both sides. Ex: Pixie Everything = a drill of Pixie Legover, Pixie ss Legover, Pixie Illusion, Pixie ss Illusion, Pixie Mirage, Pixie ss Mirage, Pixie Pickup, and Pixie ss Pickup, each on both sides. An Everything drill has no set order, and just requires every unique trick be done once.


And while it’s not necessarily multiple tricks, combining traditional tricks with physical obstacles is called trials.

Ending a trick or string
A string or a trick can be ended in one of a few ways. In footbag, players hit tricks, as opposed to “landing” them. If a player hits a trick and catches the bag, that is a handcatch, and in string notation can be written as [trick]>hand, which usually implies good execution and control. The term seal is also used to imply hitting a trick with enough control to do something after; ex: “Whirl sealed with Mirage.”


If the player makes a mistake and the bag lands on the ground, that is a drop or a dropped trick. Any combination of tricks performed without dropping can be said to be dropless; this term is usually applied in a competitive context (ex: a “dropless routine”) to imply a high level of control.


A bailed trick is one that was attempted but modified on the fly to something easier to avoid dropping (ex: was going for a Spinning Whirl but bailed to Spinning Clipper because the set was too low). A footed trick is one that was almost hit, but the bag rolled off the stalling foot at the end. A dropped trick could also be over-dexed if the leg dexes too far which causes it to miss the bag entirely.

ADDs
Traditional footbag tricks can be categorized or scored using a points system called the ADD system. ADD stands for Additional Degree of Difficulty, and was conceived back in the 1980s when the sport was developing. In addition to categorization and scoring, ADDs can be used to get a very rough gauge of a trick’s difficulty and group together different tricks of approximately similar difficulty. The ADD system is controversial, but is ingrained in the culture.

ADD Categories
ADDs are counted in whole numbers and are awarded for various components that are each worth 1 ADD: DEL, DEX, XBD (with the same meanings as previously defined), UNS for any contact surfaces apart from Toe, Inside, Outside, and Knee), and BOD for any Spinning, Ducking, Paradox, Symp, Flying, or Xdex component. Xdex is similar to Paradox in that it involves hip pivoting and positioning the body between dexes, but for Toe tricks instead of Xbd ones (ex: the movement in an Atomsmasher after the set to bring the Mirage leg under the bag).


For a brief example, Dimwalk is a 4-ADD trick: 1 ADD for the uptime DEX, 1 for the downtime DEX, and 2 for the Clipper (1 for XBD, and 1 for DEL).

ADD Groupings
Based on how many ADDs a trick has, it can be grouped and sorted into various tiers: 2-ADD and up tricks are referred to as Tiltless tricks. 3-ADD and up as Guiltless, 4 and up as Tripless, 5 and up as Fearless, 6 and up as Beastly, and 7 and up as Godly. For ADD tiers 2-5, the names can drop the “-less” suffix to describe the tier below them, for example: “Tilts” refers to 1-ADD tricks, “Guilts” 2-ADD, and so on. There are also special names for 3-trick Beastly and Godly combos: a 6>6>6 is called a “Beast”, and a 7>7>7 is called a “Jackpot”.


Within the guiltless tier are BOPs, which stand for the tricks “Butterfly”, “Osis”, and “Pdx Mirage”, which are the most basic guiltless tricks and the foundation for traditional guiltless play. Genuine Guiltless or just Genuine is a combo or string of Guiltless tricks that do not use BOPs, which is generally much more difficult.


Within the Fearless and Beastly tiers is the subcategory of “PDX Whirl-Free” (PWF), which means to do those combos without any “Pdx Whirl” component. Pdx Whirl is the simplest 4-ADD component, which makes PWF Fearless/Beastly much more challenging.

ADD System Controversy
The ADD system is controversial for many reasons but mostly because it can dissuade players from using tricks that don’t fit nicely into the system. Newer players are encouraged to not ADD hunt, which means to chase high-ADD tricks solely for the number and little other reason.

Circles
The most common way to play freestyle footbag with others is in a circle: players form a literal circle, usually with 3-5 people, and take individual turns with the bag to do tricks. Play progresses in order, usually clockwise, and when a player’s turn is over they pass the bag to the next player for their turn. After a player’s turn, they will often get props (like a high five) from the others when they do something cool.


To get into a circle, a player may ask another if they want to kick, or sometimes the more generic freestyle term shred, or simply if they want to play.


Within a circle, If a player wants to give the previous one another turn for any reason they can give them a passback. A player might also self-serve to themselves which, depending on who you ask, could be seen as disrespectful to the other players. Another “YMMV” disrespectful move is to toe scrape or toe up the bag by sliding it onto your foot using the sole of the other, which could cause damage to it on rough ground.

Events & Competition
There are generally two types of footbag events that are hosted: tournaments and jams. Tournaments are focused on competition, with the World Championships (or Worlds) being the biggest tournament of the year. Jams are more casual events, and may still have competition, but are more focused on getting regional players together for a fun time.

Competitive Disciplines
There are many competitive formats of footbag and they are usually judged on some aspect of trick difficulty & execution:


Routine is a timed performance choreographed to music and scored on artistry and technicality.


Circle and Battle are variants of a straight-ahead technical showdown. Circle mimics the style of a casual circle, while Battle is 1-on-1. Shred-Off is an online-only async variant of Battle.


Sick 1 and Sick 3 are “best trick” competitions, where Sick 1 is best single trick, and Sick 3 is best 3-trick combo.


Request is an elimination-style event where organizers prepare ahead of time a list of links which players must then complete with no prior knowledge or practice.


Rippin’ Run, Iron Man, and Last Man Standing are all variations of “who can do the longest string before dropping.” Rippin’ Run (named after “Rippin” Rick Reese) and Iron Man are head-to-head, while Last Man Standing is every player at the same time.


Shred 30 is a formula-based event where players have 30 seconds to do a combo and are scored on the ADD count and uniqueness of the combo.


Mirage Race is a joke event where players race towards a finish line but can only move forward by doing the trick Mirage.

For-Fun Games
While freestyle footbag is usually played for fun in free-flowing circles, there are a couple of structured games that can be played to mix things up.


HACK (or any set of letters) is similar to games like HORSE or SKATE. One player does a trick/combo, and the other player(s) have to repeat it within a few attempts (usually 3) or else they get a letter. When their letters spell HACK, they are out, and the last player remaining is the winner.


Pyramid is a combo-building game: one player does one trick, then the next player has a few attempts (usually 3) to repeat that trick, and add one more trick of their choosing to create the start of a combo. The next player repeats the 2-trick combo and adds one more trick, and so on with each player adding one more trick to create a longer and longer combo. If a player fails to complete the combo + 1 trick, they are eliminated. Play continues until one player remains.

Non-Freestyle Footbag Disciplines/Games
Hacky sack or circle kicking is the most well-known game of footbag that is about keeping the bag off the ground for as long as possible, usually with a group of people.


Footbag net is a sport played over a net with similar rules to volleyball.


Footbag golf is similar to disc golf, but with footbags.


2-Square, 4-Square or “any”-square are like the schoolyard games of the same name, but with footbags.


Index
14s
2 square, two square
32s
4 square, four square
ADD, ADDs, additional degree of difficulty
ADD hunting
Adidas Rod Laver, Laver
Air shred
Alpha
Alpine
Attack
Back-to-back, b2b
Backside, bs
Backspin
Bail, bailed
Battle
Beast, beastly
Beta
Bigfoot
Body (component), BOD (ADD category)
BOP
Both sides, bs, both sided
Brocka
Broken-in, break in
BSOS, “bee sauce”, BSOR
Bump
Burger, stallburger
Circle (style of play), circle (event)
Circle kicking
Clean
CLIMP
Clipper (stall), clipper player
Cloud
Combo
Component
Contact (component), contact (string length)
Crank
Crispy
Crossbody
Crown, crowny
Deep
Delay, DEL (ADD category)
Dex, dexterity, dexless, DEX (ADD category)
Dive, diving
Downtime
Dragon
Drop, dropped, dropless
Drill
Duck, ducking
Everything
Hacky sack (object), hacks, HACK (game), Hacky sack (game)
Half dex
Heel
Hippy
In-out, in
Inside (surface)
Inspin, in-
Far
Fearless
Flapper
Fill, filler
Flick
Flipside, flip
Floppy
Flying, flyer
Footbag net
Footbag golf
Footbags, bags
Footed, foot
Full dex
Full symp
Froggy
Frontside, fs
Gamma
Godly
Golf
Genuine, genuine guiltless
Guiltless
Gyro
Handcatch, hand
Hit
Inspin, inspinning
Iron man
Jackpot
Jam
Job, Job’s, Jobs
Kick
Last man standing
Laver
Leggy
LIMP
Link
Magic hop
Marathon, marathon drilling
Midstring
Midtime
Mirage Race
Mirror
Mods, modifications
Muted
Near
Net
Nickname
Non-unique
One sided
Opposite, op, far
Out-in (dex direction), out
Outside
Over-dex
Panels
Paradox, pdx
Pass, passback
Peaking, peak
Pincher
Props
PS, paradox symposium
Pulled
PWF, pdx whirl-free
Pyramid
Quantums
Rake
Repeat, rpt
Request
Rewind
Rippin run
Roll
Rolly
Rooted
Routine
Run
Same side, ss, near
Scoop, scoopy, scooped
Seal
Self-serve
Set, set foot, set (uptime)
Shuffle, shuffling
Shoey
Shred
Shred-Off
Shred 30
Sick 1, sick 3
Side
Sideways
Slurry
Sole
Spin, spinning, gyro
Stall
Stally
Stomping, stomp
String, string notation
Strong side
Support foot
Surface
Symple, symp
Symposium, symp
Technical name
The
Thin
Tiltless
Toe (surface), toe (contact)
Toe box
Toe player
Toe scrape, toe up
Toe wall
Tournament
Transfer
Trials
Tripless
Unique
Unusual, UNS (ADD category)
Uptime
Walkover
Weave, weaving
Window
Worlds, world championships
Wrap
Xbd
XBD (ADD category)
Xdex
Zulu
